"How to define your install strategy" guide (#2860)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/progressive-web-apps/define-install-strategy/index.md

---
layout: post
title: How to define your install strategy
authors:
  - demianrenzulli
  - petelepage
date: 2020-05-12
updated: 2020-05-13
description: |
  Best practices for combining different installation offerings to increase installation rates and avoid platform competition and cannibalization.
---

In the past, app installs were only possible in the context of native applications. Today, modern web apps offer installable experiences that provide the same level of integration and reliability as native apps.

You can achieve this in different ways:

- Installing the PWA [from the browser](https://web.dev/customize-install/).
- Installing the PWA [from the app store](https://developers.google.com/web/android/trusted-web-activity).

> Having different distribution channels is a powerful way of reaching a broad number of users, but choosing the right strategy to promote them, can be challenging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having different distribution channels is a powerful way of reaching a broad number of users, but choosing the right strategy to promote them can be challenging.
```

This guide explores best practices for combining different installation offerings to increase installation rates and avoid platform competition and cannibalization. The installation offerings covered include PWAs installed from both the browser and the App Store, as well as native apps.

## Why make your web app installable?

> Installed Progressive Web Apps run in a standalone window instead of a browser tab. They're launchable from on the user's home screen, dock, taskbar, or shelf. It's possible to search for them on a device and jump between them with the app switcher, making them feel like part of the device they're installed on. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installed Progressive Web Apps run in a standalone window instead of a browser tab. They're launchable from the user's home screen, dock, taskbar, or shelf. It's possible to search for them on a device and jump between them with the app switcher, making them feel like part of the device they're installed on. 
```

> But having both an installable web app, and a native app can be confusing for users. For some users native apps may be the best choice, but for others they can present some drawbacks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But having both an installable web app and a native app can be confusing for users. For some users native apps may be the best choice, but for others they can present some drawbacks:
```

- **Storage constraints:** Installing a new app might mean deleting others, or cleaning up space, by removing valuable content. This is especially disadvantageous for users on low-end devices.
- **Available bandwidth:** Downloading an app can be a costly and slow process, even more for users on slow connections and expensive data plans.

> - **Friction:** Leaving a website and moving to a store to download an app, creates additional friction, delaying a user action that could be performed directly in the web.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Friction:** Leaving a website and moving to a store to download an app creates additional friction and delays a user action that could be performed directly in the web.
```

- **Update cycle:** Making changes in native apps might require going through an app review process, which can slow down changes and experiments (e.g. A/B tests).

In some cases, the percentage of users that won't download your native app might be large, for example: those that think that they won't use the app very often, or can't justify spending several megabytes of storage or data. You can determine the size of this segment in several ways, for example by using an analytics setup to track the percentage of "mobile web only" users.

If the size of this segment is considerable, that's a good indication that you need to provide alternative ways of installing your experiences.

## Promoting the installing of your PWA through the browser

> If you have a high quality PWA, it may be better to promote its installation over your native app. For example, if the native app is missing functionality offered by your PWA, or if it hasn't been updated in a while. It can also be helpful to promote installation of your PWA if the native app wasn't optimized for bigger screens, such as on ChromeOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a high quality PWA, it may be better to promote its installation over your native app. For example, if the native app is missing functionality offered by your PWA, or if it hasn't been updated in a while. It can also be helpful to promote installation of your PWA if the native app wasn't optimized for bigger screens, such as on Chrome OS.
```

## Prevent your PWA from cannibalizing your native app install rate

In some cases, you may choose to promote the installation of your native app over your PWA, but in this case, we still recommend you provide a mechanism to allow users to install your PWA. This fallback option makes it possible for users who can't, or don't want to install your native app to get a similar, installed experience.

The first step to implement this strategy is to define a heuristic for when you'll show the user an install promotion for your PWA, for example:

__"A PWA user is a user that has seen the native app install prompt and not installed the native app. They have returned to the site at least five times, or they have clicked the app banner, but have continued using the website instead."__

Then, the heuristic can be implemented in the following way:

1. Show the native app install banner.

> 1. If a user dismisses the banner, set a cookie with that information (e.g: `document.cookie = "app-install-banner=dismissed"`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If a user dismisses the banner, set a cookie with that information (e.g. `document.cookie = "app-install-banner=dismissed"`).
```

> 1. Use another cookie to track the number of user visits to the site (e.g: `document.cookie = "user-visits=1"`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use another cookie to track the number of user visits to the site (e.g. `document.cookie = "user-visits=1"`).
```

> 1. Write a function `isPWAUser()`, that uses the information previously stored in the cookies, along with the [`getInstalledRelatedApps()`](https://web.dev/get-installed-related-apps/) API to determine if a user is considered a "PWA user".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Write a function, such as `isPWAUser()`, that uses the information previously stored in the cookies along with the [`getInstalledRelatedApps()`](https://web.dev/get-installed-related-apps/) API to determine if a user is considered a "PWA user".
```

1. At the moment when the user performs a meaningful action, call `isPWAUser()`. If the function returns true and the PWA install prompt was saved previously, you can show the PWA install button.

## Promoting the installing of your PWA through an app store

> Apps that are available in App stores can be built with different technologies, including PWA techniques. In [this talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7YX4cZ_Cto&feature=youtu.be) you can find a summary of the technologies that can be used to that end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apps that are available in App stores can be built with different technologies, including PWA techniques. In [Blending PWA into native environments](https://youtu.be/V7YX4cZ_Cto) you can find a summary of the technologies that can be used to that end.
```

Oyo, one of India's largest hospitality companies, built a [Lite version of their app](https://web.dev/oyo-lite-twa/), and made it available in the Play Store using TWA.  It's only 850 KB, just 7% the size of their native Android app. And once installed, it's indistinguishable from  their native app:

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/oyo-case-study/oyo-lite.webm" type="video/webm; codecs=vp8">
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/oyo-case-study/oyo-lite.mp4" type="video/mp4; codecs=h264">
  </video>
 <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    OYO Lite in action.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Oyo kept both the flagship and "lite" app versions in the store, leaving the final decision to users.

#### Providing a lightweight web experience

Intuitively, users on low-end devices, might be more inclined to download lightweight versions of apps than users on high-end phones. Therefore, if it's possible to identify a user's device, one could prioritize the lightweight app install banner over the heavier native app version.

> On the web, it's possible to obtain device signals and approximately map them to device categories ("high", "mid", "low"). You can obtain this information in different ways, using either JavaScript APIs or client hints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the web, it's possible to obtain device signals and approximately map them to device categories (e.g. "high", "mid", or "low"). You can obtain this information in different ways, using either JavaScript APIs or client hints.
```

#### Using JavaScript APIs

> Using JavaScript APIs like [navigator.hardwareConcurrency](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/NavigatorConcurrentHardware/hardwareConcurrency), [navigator.deviceMemory](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/deviceMemory) and [navigator.connection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/connection) you can get information about the device CPU, memory and network status respectively. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using JavaScript APIs like [navigator.hardwareConcurrency](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/NavigatorConcurrentHardware/hardwareConcurrency), [navigator.deviceMemory](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/deviceMemory), and [navigator.connection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/connection) you can get information about the device CPU, memory and network status respectively. For example:
```

```javascript
const deviceCategory = req.get('Device-Memory') < 1 ? 'lite' : 'full';`
```

#### Using client hints

Device signals can be also inferred in HTTP request headers, through [client hints](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Client_hints). Here's how you can implement the previous code for device memory with client hints:

First, tell the browser you are interested in receiving device memory hints in the header of the HTTP response for any first-party request:

```html
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
Accept-CH: Device-Memory
```

Then, you'll start receiving Device-Memory information in the request header of HTTP requests:

```html
GET /main.js HTTP/1.1
Device-Memory: 0.5
```

> You can use this information in your backends, to store a cookie with the category of the user's device:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this information in your backends to store a cookie with the category of the user's device:
```

```javascript
app.get('/route', (req, res) => {
  // Determine device category

 const deviceCategory = req.get('Device-Memory') < 1 ? 'lite' : 'full';

  // Set cookie
  res.setCookie('Device-Category', deviceCategory);

>   ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  …
```

});
```

Finally, create your own logic to map this information to device categories, and show the corresponding app install prompt on each case:

```javascript

> if(isDeviceMidOrLowEnd() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if (isDeviceMidOrLowEnd()) {
```
Missing closing parentheses
